README.md, before:

## Meteor Todo App Challenge

Initial Readme for this challenge.

### Setup

I used the Meteor CLI to create the base project for this challenge. The instructions indicated we should create an empty application so I used the command, `Meteor create --bare todoApp`.

I then added in the imports, client, and server files provided with the challenge instructions.

### Issues

#### Initial build and launch

I tried to launch the app using `meteor` to see where things were at, the current state. It failed to launch and I was presented with a number of error messages that I'll need to work through.

The initial issues seems to be related to packages that are called but not currently installed within this project, specifically `Faker`. I'll add that and any others that might be missing using the `meteor add` command and see where that gets me.

---

#### Missing Packages

I added the necessary package, `gbit:faker`, which is a Meteor specific wrapper for `Faker`. It was added to the `packages` file but its dependencies weren't. Which seems odd. I'm also not sure why `Blaze`, `jQuery`, and `observe-sequence` were added to the `versions` file. I'll need to look up what that's for.

Scratch that, `Faker` has no dependencies so I'm not sure why those other packages were mentioned during the install process. In general I'm not a fan of tools doing things for unexplained reasons.

`Versions` is where Meteor tracks all versioning information for the various packages necessary for the base install and those used by a given app.

---

I also added the `templating` package. It, too, added additional versions.

I tried to build and run the app again and was presented with another error message. This time it was related to the package I just installed. There's evidently a default templating / rendering package, `static-html` that is conflicting with `templating`.

I'll remove the default package and see if it helps.

The app builds and launches now. But the todo list is empty (which isn't correct based on the code) and I'm not able to add new tasks. There's one console error indicating access was denied.

---

#### Missing Data

So the two issues I have right now is an empty todo list when there should be 10 random items and an inability to add new tasks.

Meteor is different from other frameworks in that it doesn't use REST. Instead it uses a protocol they developed called Distributed Data Protocol (DDP). So instead of using REST methods for basic CRUD actions based on endpoints you write, you use use Meteor methods.

This is pretty obvious when looking over the code used in this app.

Because of this, when you send or try to retrieve data you have to specifically allow or deny the requests. So I can't create a new todo item and try to send that directly to the database, which makes sense. I'll need to modify the code on the client and server side to allow for this.

As for the lack of initial items, that also has to do with this new model. In order to share data back and forth between the client and database, they set up a `publish` and `subscribe` metaphor. You specify the data you want to make available and `publish` it, which amounts to a query of some sort. Specific elements of the client can the `subscribe` to this data and display the results.

So I need to publish the list of todo items I want displayed and then subscribe to that in order to make use of it on the client.

---

#### Publish and Subscribe Implementation

Adding the publish and subscribe methods was straightforward. Thankfully the Meteor documentation is pretty good. There's an entire section that covers the process, [Publications and Data Loading](https://guide.meteor.com/data-loading.html).

I added the publish method on the server side to query all tasks and make it available to the client side.

```
Meteor.publish("tasks.all", function() {
  return Tasks.find({
    userId: { $exists: false }
  });
});
```

I added a corresponding subscribe method on the client side to enable the data to be displayed.

```
Meteor.subscribe("tasks.all");
```

The Meteor CLI has a built in monitoring process so anytime you modify a file the application is built and launched again. Once I added the changes listed above I was able to see the initial 10 todo items.

I still can't add new items, update, or delete existing ones.

---

#### Query and Call Methods

I need to add explicit methods for each type of query that I want to make to the db. It looks like there are at least three that need to be added, `insert`, `update`, and `remove`. These need to be added to the server side code. There also needs to be corresponding `calls` to each of theses methods when that data needs to be modified.

Again, the documentation is pretty good. There's a whole section on [Methods](https://guide.meteor.com/methods.html) and how to use them.

---

I added a method to enable new tasks to be added. It's a pretty simplistic implementation and not ideal. But it works and should be sufficient for this challenge. In a real world app you'd want to include validation and error handling and of course tests.

```
Meteor.methods({
  createTodo: function(text) {
    Tasks.insert({
      text,
      createdAt: new Date()
    });
  }
});
```

```
Meteor.call("createTodo", text);
```

---

I added methods and calls to them to handle the updating of the checkbox and the ability to remove items all together. From what I can tell the app now runs without error as intended. It launches with ten random items displayed that can be checked off or removed entirely. A user can also add new tasks and check those off and remove them if they want.

I think I'm ready to move on and add the text search functionality.

---

#### Task Search

There aren't many resources available detailing how to implement this type of functionality. There is one post I found which is what I used as my stating point.

The basic concept of search relies on features of MongoDB. There is an option available that when enabled will index specific user specified values. This index can then be searched when making queries.

Specifying the values you'd like to index is straightforward.

```
Tasks._ensureIndex({
    text: "text"
  });
```

Once that's been turned on so to speak, the next step is to set up a publish method on the server. This process is similar to what we did previously.

```
Meteor.publish("search.tasks", function(searchString) {
  if (!searchString) {
    return Tasks.find({});
  } else {
    return Tasks.find({
      $text: { $search: searchString }
    });
  }
});
```

I verified the index method was working via the Mongo CLI. The publish method looks correct but until I figure out the client side implementation I won't know for sure.

---

I added a basic search field to the app that's based on the task input field. I also added the `Session` package as it seems necessary to be able to be able to store a search term for use in another function. The one write-up I found used it so that seems to make sense. We'll see.

---

#### Search issues

I've been working on implementing serach for a while now. It's been challenging for many reasons but mainly because I don't have a firm understanding of Meteor. Which is to be expected given I only just started working with it. The frustration comes in because I have most of the pieces in place. I have a search form and am able to save user input for use in other parts of the application. I have enabled indexing of the specific field I need and can query it from the Mongo CLI so I know that part is working. The problem is to bring all these various pieces together.

I am running short on time so have decided to try and make use of a package and see if that works. We'll see.

---

Commit message:

Update README with details of Easy Search

README.md, after:

## Meteor Todo App Challenge

Initial Readme for this challenge.

### Setup

I used the Meteor CLI to create the base project for this challenge. The instructions indicated we should create an empty application so I used the command, `Meteor create --bare todoApp`.

I then added in the imports, client, and server files provided with the challenge instructions.

### Issues

#### Initial build and launch

I tried to launch the app using `meteor` to see where things were at, the current state. It failed to launch and I was presented with a number of error messages that I'll need to work through.

The initial issues seems to be related to packages that are called but not currently installed within this project, specifically `Faker`. I'll add that and any others that might be missing using the `meteor add` command and see where that gets me.

---

#### Missing Packages

I added the necessary package, `gbit:faker`, which is a Meteor specific wrapper for `Faker`. It was added to the `packages` file but its dependencies weren't. Which seems odd. I'm also not sure why `Blaze`, `jQuery`, and `observe-sequence` were added to the `versions` file. I'll need to look up what that's for.

Scratch that, `Faker` has no dependencies so I'm not sure why those other packages were mentioned during the install process. In general I'm not a fan of tools doing things for unexplained reasons.

`Versions` is where Meteor tracks all versioning information for the various packages necessary for the base install and those used by a given app.

---

I also added the `templating` package. It, too, added additional versions.

I tried to build and run the app again and was presented with another error message. This time it was related to the package I just installed. There's evidently a default templating / rendering package, `static-html` that is conflicting with `templating`.

I'll remove the default package and see if it helps.

The app builds and launches now. But the todo list is empty (which isn't correct based on the code) and I'm not able to add new tasks. There's one console error indicating access was denied.

---

#### Missing Data

So the two issues I have right now is an empty todo list when there should be 10 random items and an inability to add new tasks.

Meteor is different from other frameworks in that it doesn't use REST. Instead it uses a protocol they developed called Distributed Data Protocol (DDP). So instead of using REST methods for basic CRUD actions based on endpoints you write, you use use Meteor methods.

This is pretty obvious when looking over the code used in this app.

Because of this, when you send or try to retrieve data you have to specifically allow or deny the requests. So I can't create a new todo item and try to send that directly to the database, which makes sense. I'll need to modify the code on the client and server side to allow for this.

As for the lack of initial items, that also has to do with this new model. In order to share data back and forth between the client and database, they set up a `publish` and `subscribe` metaphor. You specify the data you want to make available and `publish` it, which amounts to a query of some sort. Specific elements of the client can the `subscribe` to this data and display the results.

So I need to publish the list of todo items I want displayed and then subscribe to that in order to make use of it on the client.

---

#### Publish and Subscribe Implementation

Adding the publish and subscribe methods was straightforward. Thankfully the Meteor documentation is pretty good. There's an entire section that covers the process, [Publications and Data Loading](https://guide.meteor.com/data-loading.html).

I added the publish method on the server side to query all tasks and make it available to the client side.

```
Meteor.publish("tasks.all", function() {
  return Tasks.find({
    userId: { $exists: false }
  });
});
```

I added a corresponding subscribe method on the client side to enable the data to be displayed.

```
Meteor.subscribe("tasks.all");
```

The Meteor CLI has a built in monitoring process so anytime you modify a file the application is built and launched again. Once I added the changes listed above I was able to see the initial 10 todo items.

I still can't add new items, update, or delete existing ones.

---

#### Query and Call Methods

I need to add explicit methods for each type of query that I want to make to the db. It looks like there are at least three that need to be added, `insert`, `update`, and `remove`. These need to be added to the server side code. There also needs to be corresponding `calls` to each of theses methods when that data needs to be modified.

Again, the documentation is pretty good. There's a whole section on [Methods](https://guide.meteor.com/methods.html) and how to use them.

---

I added a method to enable new tasks to be added. It's a pretty simplistic implementation and not ideal. But it works and should be sufficient for this challenge. In a real world app you'd want to include validation and error handling and of course tests.

```
Meteor.methods({
  createTodo: function(text) {
    Tasks.insert({
      text,
      createdAt: new Date()
    });
  }
});
```

```
Meteor.call("createTodo", text);
```

---

I added methods and calls to them to handle the updating of the checkbox and the ability to remove items all together. From what I can tell the app now runs without error as intended. It launches with ten random items displayed that can be checked off or removed entirely. A user can also add new tasks and check those off and remove them if they want.

I think I'm ready to move on and add the text search functionality.

---

#### Task Search

There aren't many resources available detailing how to implement this type of functionality. There is one post I found which is what I used as my stating point.

The basic concept of search relies on features of MongoDB. There is an option available that when enabled will index specific user specified values. This index can then be searched when making queries.

Specifying the values you'd like to index is straightforward.

```
Tasks._ensureIndex({
    text: "text"
  });
```

Once that's been turned on so to speak, the next step is to set up a publish method on the server. This process is similar to what we did previously.

```
Meteor.publish("search.tasks", function(searchString) {
  if (!searchString) {
    return Tasks.find({});
  } else {
    return Tasks.find({
      $text: { $search: searchString }
    });
  }
});
```

I verified the index method was working via the Mongo CLI. The publish method looks correct but until I figure out the client side implementation I won't know for sure.

---

I added a basic search field to the app that's based on the task input field. I also added the `Session` package as it seems necessary to be able to be able to store a search term for use in another function. The one write-up I found used it so that seems to make sense. We'll see.

---

#### Search issues

I've been working on implementing search for a while now. It's been challenging for many reasons but mainly because I don't have a firm understanding of Meteor. Which is to be expected given I only just started working with it. The frustration comes in because I have most of the pieces in place. I have a search form and am able to save user input for use in other parts of the application. I have enabled indexing of the specific field I need and can query it from the Mongo CLI so I know that part is working. The problem is to bring all these various pieces together.

I am running short on time so have decided to try and make use of a package and see if that works. We'll see.

---

I spent time trying to implement search using a package called [Easy Search](http://matteodem.github.io/meteor-easy-search/). I didn't have much luck. The documentation was rather sparse. I didn't find it too helpful. I'm not sure what I'll try next. It really feels like I'm missing something obvious but I'm not sure what.
